# Chapter 15. Choosing Your Database

At this point in the book, we’ve covered a lot of the general issues you need to be aware of to make
decisions in the new world of polyglot persistence. It’s now time to talk about choosing your
databases for future development work. Naturally, we don’t know your particular circumstances, so
we can’t give you your answer, nor can we reduce it to a simple set of rules to follow. Furthermore,
it’s still early days in the production use of NoSQL systems, so even what we do know is immature—
in a couple of years we may well think differently.

We see two broad reasons to consider a NoSQL database: programmer productivity and data
access performance. In different cases these forces may complement or contradict each other. Both of
them are difficult to assess early on in a project, which is awkward since your choice of a data
storage model is difficult to abstract so as to allow you to change your mind later on.

## 15.1. Programmer Productivity

Talk to any developer of an enterprise application, and you’ll sense frustration from working with
relational databases. Information is usually collected and displayed in terms of aggregates, but it has
to be transformed into relations in order to persist it. This chore is easier than it used to be; during the
1990s many projects groaned under the effort of building object-relational mapping layers. By the
2000s, we’ve seen popular ORM frameworks such as Hibernate, iBATIS, and Rails Active Record
that reduce much of that burden. But this has not made the problem go away. ORMs are a leaky
abstraction, there are always some cases that need more attention—particularly in order to get decent
performance.

In this situation aggregate-oriented databases can offer a tempting deal. We can remove the ORM
and persist aggregates naturally as we use them. We’ve come across several projects that claim
palpable benefits from moving to an aggregate-oriented solution.

Graph databases offer a different simplification. Relational databases do not do a good job with
data that has a lot of relationships. A graph database offers both a more natural storage API for this
kind of data and query capabilities designed around these kinds of structures.

All kinds of NoSQL systems are better suited to nonuniform data. If you find yourself struggling
with a strong schema in order to support ad-hoc fields, then the schemaless NoSQL databases can
offer considerable relief.

These are the major reasons why the programming model of NoSQL databases may improve the
productivity of your development team. The first step of assessing this for your circumstances is to
look at what your software will need to do. Run through the current features and see if and how the
data usage fits. As you do this, you may begin to see that a particular data model seems like a good fit.
That closeness of fit suggests that using that model will lead to easier programming.

As you do this, remember that polyglot persistence is about using multiple data storage solutions. It
may be that you’ll see different data storage models fit different parts of your data. This would
suggest using different databases for different aspects of your data. Using multiple databases is
inherently more complex than using a single store, but the advantages of a good fit in each case may
be better overall.

As you look at the data model fit, pay particular attention to cases where there is a problem. You may see most of your features will work well with an aggregate, but a few will not. Having a few features that don’t fit the model well isn’t a reason to avoid the model—the difficulties of the bad fit
may not overwhelm the advantages of the good fit—but it’s useful to spot and highlight these bad fit
cases.

Going through your features and assessing your data needs should lead you to one or more
alternatives for how to handle your database needs. This will give you a starting point, but the next
step is to try things out by actually building software. Take some initial features and build them, while
paying close attention to how straightforward it is to use the technology you’re considering. In this
situation, it may be worthwhile to build the same features with a couple of different databases in
order to see which works best. People are often reluctant to do this—no one likes to build software
that will be discarded. Yet this is an essential way to judge how effective a particular framework is.

Sadly, there is no way to properly measure how productive different designs are. We have no way
of properly measuring output. Even if you build exactly the same feature, you can’t truly compare the
productivity because knowledge of building it once makes it easier a second time, and you can’t build
them simultaneously with identical teams. What you can do is ensure the people who did the work can
give an opinion. Most developers can sense when they are more productive in one environment than
another. Although this is a subjective judgment, and you may well get disagreements between team
members, this is the best judgment you will get. In the end we believe the team doing the work should
decide.

When trying out a database to judge productivity, it’s important to also try out some of the bad fit
cases we mentioned earlier. That way the team can get a feeling of both the happy path and the
difficult one, to gain an overall impression.

This approach has its flaws. Often you can’t get a full appreciation of a technology without
spending many months using it—and running an assessment for that long is rarely cost-effective. But
like many things in life, we need to make the best assessment we can, knowing its flaws, and go with
that. The essential thing here is to base the decision on as much real programming as you can. Even a
mere week working with a technology can tell you things you’d never learn from a hundred vendor
presentations.

## 15.2. Data-Access Performance

The concern that led to the growth of NoSQL databases was rapid access to lots of data. As large
websites emerged, they wanted to grow horizontally and run on large clusters. They developed the
early NoSQL databases to help them run efficiently on such architectures. As other data users follow
their lead, again the focus is on accessing data rapidly, often with large volumes involved.

There are many factors that can determine a database’s better performance than the relational
default in various circumstances. A aggregate-oriented database may be very fast for reading or
retrieving aggregates compared to a relational database where data is spread over many tables.
Easier sharding and replication over clusters allows horizontal scaling. A graph database can
retrieve highly connected data more quickly than using relational joins.

If you’re investigating NoSQL databases based on performance, the most important thing you must
do is to test their performance in the scenarios that matter to you. Reasoning about how a database
may perform can help you build a short list, but the only way you can assess performance properly is
to build something, run it, and measure it.


When building a performance assessment, the hardest thing is often getting a realistic set of
performance tests. You can’t build your actual system, so you need to build a representative subset.
It’s important, however, for this subset to be as faithful a representative as possible. It’s no good
taking a database that’s intended to serve hundreds of concurrent users and assessing its performance
with a single user. You are going to need to build representative loads and data volumes.

Particularly if you are building a public website, it can be difficult to build a high-load testbed.
Here, a good argument can be made for using cloud computing resources both to generate load and to
build a test cluster. The elastic nature of cloud provisioning is very helpful for short-lived
performance assessment work.

You’re not going to be able to test every way in which your application will be used, so you need
to build a representative subset. Choose scenarios that are the most common, the most performance-
dependent, and those that don’t seem to fit your database model well. The latter may alert you to any
risks outside of your main use cases.

Coming up with volumes to test for can be tricky, especially early on in a project when it’s not
clear what your production volumes are likely to be. You will have to come up with something to
base your thinking on, so be sure to make it explicit and to communicate it with all the stakeholders.
Making it explicit reduces the chance that different people have varying ideas on what a “heavy read
load” is. It also allows you to spot problems more easily should your later discoveries wander off
your original assumptions. Without making your assumptions explicit, it’s easier to drift away from
them without realizing you need to redo your testbed as you learn new information.

## 15.3. Sticking with the Default

Naturally we think that NoSQL is a viable option in many circumstances—otherwise we wouldn’t
have spent several months writing this book. But we also realize that there are many cases, indeed the
majority of cases, where you’re better off sticking with the default option of a relational database.

Relational databases are well known; you can easily find people with the experience of using them.
They are mature, so you are less likely to run into the rough edges of new technology. There are lots
of tools that are built on relational technology that you can take advantage of. You also don’t have to
deal with the political issues of making an unusual choice—picking a new technology will always
introduce a risk of problems should things run into difficulties.

So, on the whole, we tend to take a view that to choose a NoSQL database you need to show a real
advantage over relational databases for your situation. There’s no shame in doing the assessments for
programmability and performance, finding no clear advantage, and staying with the relational option.
We think there are many cases where it is advantageous to use NoSQL databases, but “many” does
not mean “all” or even “most.”

## 15.4. Hedging Your Bets

One of the greatest difficulties we have in giving advice on choosing a data-storage option is that we
don’t have that much data to go on. As we write this, we are only seeing very early adopters
discussing their experiences with these technologies, so we don’t have a clear picture of the actual
pros and cons.

With the situation this uncertain, there’s more of an argument for encapsulating your database
choice—keeping all your database code in a section of your codebase that is relatively easy to


replace should you decide to change your database choice later. The classic way to do this is through
an explicit data store layer in your application—using patterns such as Data Mapper and Repository
[Fowler PoEAA]. Such an encapsulation layer does carry a cost, particularly when you are unsure
about using quite different models, such as key-value versus graph data models. Worse still, we don’t
have experience yet with encapsulating data layers between these very different kinds of data stores.

On the whole, our advice is to encapsulate as a default strategy, but pay attention to the cost of
insulating layer. If it’s getting too much of a burden, for example by making it harder to use some
helpful database features, then it’s a good argument for using the database that has those features. This
information may be just what you need to make a database choice and thus eliminate the
encapsulation.

This is another argument for decomposing the database layer into services that encapsulate data
storage (“Service Usage over Direct Data Store Usage,” p. 136 ). As well as reducing coupling
between various services, this has the additional advantage of making it easier to replace a database
should things not work out in the future. This is a plausible approach even if you end up using the
same database everywhere—should things go badly, you can gradually swap it out, focusing on the
most problematic services first.

This design advice applies just as much if you prefer to stick with a relational option. By
encapsulating segments of your database into services, you can replace parts of your data store with a
NoSQL technology as it matures and the advantages become clearer.

## 15.5. Key Points

- The two main reasons to use NoSQL technology are:
    - To improve programmer productivity by using a database that better matches an application’s
       needs.
    - To improve data access performance via some combination of handling larger data volumes,
       reducing latency, and improving throughput.
- It’s essential to test your expectations about programmer productivity and/or performance
    before committing to using a NoSQL technology.
- Service encapsulation supports changing data storage technologies as needs and technology
    evolve. Separating parts of applications into services also allows you to introduce NoSQL into
    an existing application.
- Most applications, particularly nonstrategic ones, should stick with relational technology—at
    least until the NoSQL ecosystem becomes more mature.

## 15.6. Final Thoughts

We hope you’ve found this book enlightening. When we started writing it, we were frustrated by the
lack of anything that would give us a broad survey of the NoSQL world. In writing this book we had
to make that survey ourselves, and we’ve found it an enjoyable journey. We hope your journey
through this material is considerably quicker but no less enjoyable.

At this point you may be considering making use of a NoSQL technology. If so this book is only an
early step in building your understanding. We urge you to download some databases and work with
them, for we’re of the firm conviction that you can only understand a technology properly by working
with it—finding its strengths and the inevitable gotchas that never make it into the documentation.


We expect that most people, including most readers of this book, will not be using NoSQL for a
while. It is a new technology and we are still early in the process of understanding when to use it and
how to use it well. But as with anything in the software world, things are changing more rapidly than
we dare predict, so do keep an eye on what’s happening in this field.

We hope you’ll also find other books and articles to help you. We think the best material on
NoSQL will be written after this book is done, so we can’t point you to anywhere in particular as we
write this. We do have an active presence on the Web, so for our more up-to-date thoughts on the
NoSQL world take a look at [http://www.sadalage.com](http://www.sadalage.com) and [http://martinfowler.com/nosql.html.](http://martinfowler.com/nosql.html.)

