# 21. Conclusion

This book is about one thing: complexity. Dealing with complexity is the
most important challenge in software design. It is what makes systems
hard to build and maintain, and it often makes them slow as well. Over the
course of the book I have tried to describe the root causes that lead to
complexity, such as dependencies and obscurity. I have discussed red flags
that can help you identify unnecessary complexity, such as information
leakage, unneeded error conditions, or names that are too generic. I have
presented some general ideas you can use to create simpler software
systems, such as striving for classes that are deep and generic, defining
errors out of existence, and separating interface documentation from
implementation documentation. And, finally, I have discussed the
investment mindset needed to produce simple designs.

The downside of all these suggestions is that they create extra work in
the early stages of a project. Furthermore, if you aren’t used to thinking
about design issues, then you will slow down even more while you learn
good design techniques. If the only thing that matters to you is making
your current code work as soon as possible, then thinking about design
will seem like drudge work that is getting in the way of your real goal.

On the other hand, if good design is an important goal for you, then the
ideas in this book should make programming more fun. Design is a
fascinating puzzle: how can a particular problem be solved with the
simplest possible structure? It’s fun to explore different approaches, and
it’s a great feeling to discover a solution that is both simple and powerful.
A clean, simple, and obvious design is a beautiful thing.

Furthermore, the investments you make in good design will pay off
quickly. The modules you defined carefully at the beginning of a project


will save you time later as you reuse them over and over. The clear
documentation that you wrote six months ago will save you time when you
return to the code to add a new feature. The time you spent honing your
design skills will also pay for itself: as your skills and experience grow,
you will find that you can produce good designs more and more quickly.
Good design doesn’t really take much longer than quick-and-dirty design,
once you know how.

The reward for being a good designer is that you get to spend a larger
fraction of your time in the design phase, which is fun. Poor designers
spend most of their time chasing bugs in complicated and brittle code. If
you improve your design skills, not only will you produce higher quality
software more quickly, but the software development process will be more
enjoyable.



## Summary of Design Principles

Here are the most important software design principles discussed in this
book:

1. Complexity is incremental: you have to sweat the small stuff ([see](./c2.md#_2-4-complexity-is-incremental)).
2. Working code isn’t enough ([see](./c3.md)).
3. Make continual small investments to improve system design (see p.15 ).
4. Modules should be deep ([see](./c4.md)).
5. Interfaces should be designed to make the most common usage as simple as possible (see p. 27).
6. It’s more important for a module to have a simple interface than a simple implementation (see pp. 55, 71 ).
7. General-purpose modules are deeper (see p. 39).
8. Separate general-purpose and special-purpose code (see p. 62).
9. Different layers should have different abstractions (see p. 45).
10. Pull complexity downward (see p. 55).
11. Define errors (and special cases) out of existence (see p. 79).
12. Design it twice ([see](./c11.md)).
13. Comments should describe things that are not obvious from the code (([see](./c13.md)).).
14. Software should be designed for ease of reading, not ease of writing (see p. 149).
15. The increments of software development should be abstractions, not features (see p. 154).


## Summary of Red Flags

Here are a few of of the most important red flags discussed in this book.
The presence of any of these symptoms in a system suggests that there is a
problem with the system’s design:

::: danger 🚩 Shallow Module 🚩
the interface for a class or method isn’t much simpler than its implementation
:::

::: danger 🚩 Shallow Module 🚩
Information Leakage: a design decision is reflected in multiple modules 
:::

::: danger 🚩 Temporal Decomposition 🚩
the code structure is based on the order in which operations are executed, not on information hiding 
:::

::: danger 🚩 Overexposure 🚩
An API forces callers to be aware of rarely used features in order to use commonly used features
:::


::: danger 🚩 Pass-Through Method 🚩
a method does almost nothing except pass its arguments to another method with a similar signature
:::

::: danger 🚩 Repetition 🚩
a nontrivial piece of code is repeated over and over
:::

::: danger 🚩 Special-General Mixture 🚩
special-purpose code is not cleanly separated from general purpose code
:::

::: danger 🚩 Conjoined Methods 🚩
two methods have so many dependencies that its hard to understand the implementation of one without understanding the implementation of the other 
:::

::: danger 🚩 Comment Repeats Code 🚩
all of the information in a comment is immediately obvious from the code next to the comment
:::


::: danger 🚩 Implementation Documentation Contaminates Interface 🚩
an interface comment describes implementation details not needed by users of the thing being documented 
:::

::: danger 🚩 Vague Name 🚩
the name of a variable or method is so imprecise that it doesn’t convey much useful information
:::

::: danger 🚩 Hard to Pick Name 🚩
it is difficult to come up with a precise and intuitive name for an entity
:::

::: danger 🚩 Hard to Describe 🚩
in order to be complete, the documentation for a variable or method must be long.
:::

::: danger 🚩 Nonobvious Code 🚩
the behavior or meaning of a piece of code cannot be understood easily.
:::



## About the Author

John Ousterhout is the Bosack Lerner Professor of Computer Science at Stanford University. He is the creator of the Tcl scripting language and is also well known for his work in distributed operating systems and storage systems. Ousterhout received a BS degree in Physics from Yale University and a PhD in Computer Science from Carnegie Mellon University. He is a member of the National Academy of Engineering and has received numerous awards, including the ACM Software System Award, the ACM Grace Murray Hopper Award, the National Science Foundation Presidential Young Investigator Award, and the U.C. Berkeley Distinguished Teaching Award.