# The Art of Readable Code

## TABLE OF C O N T E N T S

- [1 CODE SHOULD BE EASY TO UNDERSTAND PREFACE](./c1.md)
   - [What Makes Code “Better”?](./c1.md#what-makes-code-better)
   - [The Fundamental Theorem of Readability](./c1.md#)
   - [Is Smaller Always Better?](./c1.md#is-smaller-always-better)
   - [Does Time-Till-Understanding Conflict with Other Goals?](./c1.md#does-time-till-understanding-conflict-with-other-goals)
   - [The Hard Part](./c1.md#the-hard-part)
- [2 PACKING INFORMATION INTO NAMES](./c2.md) - Part One SURFACE-LEVEL IMPROVEMENTS
   - Choose Specific Words
   - Avoid Generic Names Like tmp and retval
   - Prefer Concrete Names over Abstract Names
   - Attaching Extra Information to a Name
   - How Long Should a Name Be?
   - Use Name Formatting to Convey Meaning
   - Summary
- [3 NAMES THAT CAN’T BE MISCONSTRUED](./c3.md)
   - Example: Filter()
   - Example: Clip(text, length)
   - Prefer min and max for (Inclusive) Limits
   - Prefer first and last for Inclusive Ranges
   - Prefer begin and end for Inclusive/Exclusive Ranges
   - Naming Booleans
   - Matching Expectations of Users
   - Example: Evaluating Multiple Name Candidates
   - Summary
- [4 AESTHETICS](./c4.md)
   - Why Do Aesthetics Matter?
   - Rearrange Line Breaks to Be Consistent and Compact
   - Use Methods to Clean Up Irregularity
   - Use Column Alignment When Helpful
   - Pick a Meaningful Order, and Use It Consistently
   - Organize Declarations into Blocks
   - Break Code into “Paragraphs”
   - Personal Style versus Consistency
   - Summary
- [5 KNOWING WHAT TO COMMENT](./c5.md)
   - What NOT to Comment
   - Recording Your Thoughts
   - Put Yourself in the Reader’s Shoes
   - Final Thoughts—Getting Over Writer’s Block
   - Summary
- [6 MAKING COMMENTS PRECISE AND COMPACT](./c6.md)
   - Keep Comments Compact
   - Avoid Ambiguous Pronouns
   - Polish Sloppy Sentences
   - Describe Function Behavior Precisely
   - Use Input/Output Examples That Illustrate Corner Cases
   - State the Intent of Your Code
   - “Named Function Parameter” Comments
   - Use Information-Dense Words
   - Summary
- [7 MAKING CONTROL FLOW EASY TO READ](./c7.md) - Part Two SIMPLIFYING LOOPS AND LOGIC
   - The Order of Arguments in Conditionals
   - The Order of if/else Blocks
   - The ?: Conditional Expression (a.k.a. “Ternary Operator”)
   - Avoid do/while Loops
   - Returning Early from a Function
   - The Infamous goto
   - Minimize Nesting
   - Can You Follow the Flow of Execution?
   - Summary
- [8 BREAKING DOWN GIANT EXPRESSIONS](./c8.md) 
   - Explaining Variables
   - Summary Variables
   - Using De Morgan’s Laws
   - Abusing Short-Circuit Logic
   - Example: Wrestling with Complicated Logic
   - Breaking Down Giant Statements
   - Another Creative Way to Simplify Expressions
   - Summary
- [9 VARIABLES AND READABILITY]
   - Eliminating Variables
   - Shrink the Scope of Your Variables
   - Prefer Write-Once Variables
   - A Final Example
   - Summary
- [10 EXTRACTING UNRELATED SUBPROBLEMS](./c10.md) - Part Three REORGANIZING YOUR CODE
   - Introductory Example: findClosestLocation()
   - Pure Utility Code
   - Other General-Purpose Code
   - Create a Lot of General-Purpose Code
   - Project-Specific Functionality
   - Simplifying an Existing Interface
   - Reshaping an Interface to Your Needs
   - Taking Things Too Far
   - Summary
- [11 ONE TASK AT A TIME](./c11.md) 
   - Tasks Can Be Small
   - Extracting Values from an Object
   - A Larger Example
   - Summary
- [12 TURNING THOUGHTS INTO CODE](./c12.md) 
   - Describing Logic Clearly
   - Knowing Your Libraries Helps
   - Applying This Method to Larger Problems
   - Summary
- [13 WRITING LESS CODE](./c13.md) 
   - Don’t Bother Implementing That Feature—You Won’t Need It
   - Question and Break Down Your Requirements
   - Keeping Your Codebase Small
   - Be Familiar with the Libraries Around You
   - Example: Using Unix Tools Instead of Coding
   - Summary
- [14 TESTING AND READABILITY](./c14.md) - Part Four SELECTED TOPICS
   - Make Tests Easy to Read and Maintain
   - What’s Wrong with This Test?
   - Making This Test More Readable
   - Making Error Messages Readable
   - Choosing Good Test Inputs
   - Naming Test Functions
   - What Was Wrong with That Test?
   - Test-Friendly Development
   - Going Too Far
   - Summary
- [15 DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING A “MINUTE/HOUR COUNTER”](./c15.md) 
   - The Problem
   - Defining the Class Interface
   - Attempt 1: A Naive Solution
   - Attempt 2: Conveyor Belt Design
   - Attempt 3: A Time-Bucketed Design
   - Comparing the Three Solutions
   - Summary
- [A FURTHER READING]
   - INDEX


### P R E F A C E

We’ve worked at highly successful software companies, with outstanding engineers, and the

code we encounter still has plenty of room for improvement. In fact, we’ve seen some really

ugly code, and you probably have too.

But when we see beautifully written code, it’s inspiring. Good code can teach you what’s going

on very quickly. It’s fun to use, and it motivates you to make your own code better.

**The goal of this book is help you make your code better.** And when we say “code,” we

literally mean the lines of code you are staring at in your editor. We’re not talking about the

overall architecture of your project, or your choice of design patterns. Those are certainly

important, but in our experience most of our day-to-day lives as programmers are spent on

the “basic” stuff, like naming variables, writing loops, and attacking problems down at the

function level. And a big part of this is reading and editing the code that’s already there. We

hope you’ll find this book so helpful to your day-to-day programming that you’ll recommend

it to everyone on your team.

### What This Book Is About

This book is about how to write code that’s highly readable. The key idea in this book is that

**code should be easy to understand**. Specifically, your goal should be to minimize the time

it takes someone else to understand your code.

This book explains this idea and illustrates it with lots of examples from different languages,

including C++, Python, JavaScript, and Java. We’ve avoided any advanced language features,

so even if you don’t know all these languages, it should still be easy to follow along. (In our

experience, the concepts of readability are mostly language-independent, anyhow.)

Each chapter dives into a different aspect of coding and how to make it “easy to understand.”

The book is divided into four parts:

_Surface-level improvements_

```
Naming, commenting, and aesthetics—simple tips that apply to every line of your
codebase
```
_Simplifying loops and logic_

```
Ways to refine the loops, logic, and variables in your program to make them easier to
understand
```
_Reorganizing your code_

```
Higher-level ways to organize large blocks of code and attack problems at the function level
```
_Selected topics_

```
Applying “easy to understand” to testing and to a larger data structure coding example
```
**viii** PREFACE


### How to Read This Book

Our book is intended to be a fun, casual read. We hope most readers will read the whole book

in a week or two.

The chapters are ordered by “difficulty”: basic topics are at the beginning, and more advanced

topics are at the end. However, each chapter is self-contained and can be read in isolation. So

feel free to skip around if you’d like.

### Using Code Examples

This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, you may use the code in this book

in your programs and documentation. You do not need to contact us for permission unless

you’re reproducing a significant portion of the code. For example, writing a program that uses

several chunks of code from this book does not require permission. Selling or distributing a

CD-ROM of examples from O’Reilly books does require permission. Answering a question by

citing this book and quoting example code does not require permission. Incorporating a

significant amount of example code from this book into your product’s documentation does

require permission.

We appreciate, but do not require, attribution. An attribution usually includes the title, author,

publisher, and ISBN. For example: “ _The Art of Readable Code_ by Dustin Boswell and Trevor

Foucher. Copyright 2012 Dustin Boswell and Trevor Foucher, 978-0-596-80229-5.”

If you feel your use of code examples falls outside fair use or the permission given above, feel

free to contact us at _permissions@oreilly.com_.

### Safari® Books Online

```
Safari Books Online is an on-demand digital library that lets you easily search
over 7,500 technology and creative reference books and videos to find the
answers you need quickly.
```
With a subscription, you can read any page and watch any video from our library online. Read

books on your cell phone and mobile devices. Access new titles before they are available for

print, and get exclusive access to manuscripts in development and post feedback for the

authors. Copy and paste code samples, organize your favorites, download chapters, bookmark

key sections, create notes, print out pages, and benefit from tons of other time-saving features.

O’Reilly Media has uploaded this book to the Safari Books Online service. To have full digital

access to this book and others on similar topics from O’Reilly and other publishers, sign up for

free at _[http://my.safaribooksonline.com](http://my.safaribooksonline.com)_.

```
PREFACE ix
```

### How to Contact Us

Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher:

```
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
1005 Gravenstein Highway North
Sebastopol, CA 95472
800-998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)
707-829-0515 (international or local)
707-829-0104 (fax)
```
We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any additional

information. You can access this page at:

```
http://shop.oreilly.com/product/9780596802301.do
```
To comment or ask technical questions about this book, send email to:

```
bookquestions@oreilly.com
```
For more information about our books, courses, conferences, and news, see our website at

_[http://www.oreilly.com](http://www.oreilly.com)_.

Find us on Facebook: _[http://facebook.com/oreilly](http://facebook.com/oreilly)_

Follow us on Twitter: _[http://twitter.com/oreillymedia](http://twitter.com/oreillymedia)_

Watch us on YouTube: _[http://www.youtube.com/oreillymedia](http://www.youtube.com/oreillymedia)_

### Acknowledgments

We’d like to thank our colleagues who donated their time to review our entire manuscript,

including Alan Davidson, Josh Ehrlich, Rob Konigsberg, Archie Russell, Gabe W., and Asaph

Zemach. Any errors in the book are entirely their fault (just kidding).

We're grateful to the many reviewers who gave us detailed feedback on various drafts of our

book, including Michael Hunger, George Heineman, and Chuck Hudson.

We also got numerous ideas and feedback from John Blackburn, Tim Dasilva, Dennis Geels,

Steve Gerding, Chris Harris, Josh Hyman, Joel Ingram, Erik Mavrinac, Greg Miller, Anatole

Paine, and Nick White. Thanks to the numerous online commenters who reviewed our draft

on O’Reilly’s OFPS system.

Thanks to the team at O’Reilly for their endless patience and support, specifically Mary Treseler

(editor), Teresa Elsey (production editor), Nancy Kotary (copyeditor), Rob Romano

(illustrator), Jessica Hosman (tools), and Abby Fox (tools). And also to our cartoonist, Dave

Allred, who made our crazy cartoon ideas come to life.

Lastly, we’d like to thank Melissa and Suzanne, for encouraging us along the way and putting

up with incessant programming conversations.

**x** PREFACE


### A P P E N D I X

**Further Reading**

```
181
```

We created this book by analyzing hundreds of code examples from production code to figure

out what works in practice. But we’ve also read many books and articles that helped us in this

pursuit.

If you’re interested in learning more, here are some resources you might like. The following

lists are by no means complete, but they’re a good place to start.

### Books on Writing High-Quality Code

_Code Complete: A Practical Handbook of Software Construction_ , 2nd edition, by Steve McConnell

(Microsoft Press, 2004)

```
A rigorous and well-researched tome on all aspects of software construction, including
code quality and more.
```
_Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code_ , by Martin Fowler et al. (Addison-Wesley

Professional, 1999)

```
A great book that talks about the philosophy of incremental code improvements and
contains a detailed catalog of many different refactorings, along with steps to take to make
these changes with less chance of breaking things.
```
_The Practice of Programming_ , by Brian Kernighan and Rob Pike (Addison-Wesley Professional,

1999)

```
Discusses various aspects of programming including debugging, testing, portability, and
performance, with various coding examples.
```
_The Pragmatic Programmer: From Journeyman to Master_ , by Andrew Hunt and David Thomas

(Addison-Wesley Professional, 1999)

```
A collection of many good programming and engineering principles, organized into short
discussions.
```
_Clean Code: A Handbook of Agile Software Craftsmanship_ , by Robert C. Martin (Prentice Hall, 2008)

```
A book similar to ours (but Java-specific); explores other topics such as error handling and
concurrency.
```

### Books on Various Programming Topics

_JavaScript: The Good Parts_ , by Douglas Crockford (O’Reilly, 2008)

```
We believe this book has a similar spirit to ours, even though the book isn’t explicitly about
readability. It’s about using a clean subset of the JavaScript language that is less error-
prone and easier to reason about.
```
_Effective Java_ , 2nd edition, by Joshua Bloch (Prentice Hall, 2008)

```
A phenomenal book about making your Java programs easier to read and more bug-free.
Although it’s about Java, many of the principles apply to all languages. Highly
recommended.
```
**182** APPENDIX


_Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software_ , by Erich Gamma, Richard Helm,

Ralph Johnson, and John Vlissides (Addison-Wesley Professional, 1994)

```
The original book on a common language of “patterns” for software engineers to talk about
object-oriented programming. As a catalog of common, useful patterns, it helps
programmers avoid the pitfalls that often happen when people try to solve a tricky problem
on their own for the first time.
```
_Programming Pearls_ , 2nd edition, by Jon Bentley (Addison-Wesley Professional, 1999)

```
A series of articles on real software problems. Great insights on solving real-world
problems in each chapter.
```
_High Performance Web Sites_ , by Steve Souders (O’Reilly, 2007)

```
Although not a book about programming, this book is noteworthy because it describes a
number of ways to optimize a website without writing much code (in keeping with
Chapter 13, Writing Less Code ).
```
_Joel on Software: And on Diverse and ..._ , by Joel Spolsky

```
Some of the best articles from http://www.joelonsoftware.com/. Spolsky writes about many
aspects of software engineering and has an insightful take on many related topics. Be sure
to read “Things You Should Never Do, Part I,” and “The Joel Test: 12 Steps to Better Code.”
```

### Books of Historical Note

_Writing Solid Code_ , by Steve Maguire (Microsoft Press, 1993)

```
This book has unfortunately become a bit dated, but it definitely influenced us with great
advice about how to make your code more bug-free. If you read it, you’ll notice a lot of
overlap with what we recommend.
```
_Smalltalk Best Practice Patterns_ , by Kent Beck (Prentice Hall, 1996)

```
Although the examples are in Smalltalk, the book has many good programming principles.
```
_The Elements of Programming Style_ , by Brian Kernighan and P.J. Plauger (Computing McGraw-

Hill, 1978)

```
One of the oldest books dealing with the issue of “the clearest way to write things.” Most
of the examples are in Fortran and PL1.
```
_Literate Programming_ , by Donald E. Knuth (Center for the Study of Language and Information,

1992)

```
We agree wholeheartedly with Knuth’s statement, “Instead of imagining that our main
task is to instruct a computer what to do, let us concentrate rather on explaining to human
beings what we want a computer to do” (p. 99). But be warned: the bulk of the book is
about Knuth’s WEB programming environment for documentation. WEB is effectively a
language for writing your programs as works of literature, with code on the sidelines.
```
```
FURTHER READING 183
```

```
Having used a WEB-derived system ourselves, we think that when code is constantly
changing (which is usually), it’s harder to keep a so-called “literate program” fresh than
it is to keep your code fresh using the practices we recommend.
```
**184** APPENDIX


### INDEX

**Symbols**
4xx HTTP response codes, 144
5xx HTTP response codes, 144
?: conditional expression, 73–74

**A**
abbreviations, names using, 19
abstract names, vs. concrete, 13–15
acronyms, names with, 19
aesthetics, 34–43
breaking code into paragraphs, 41–42
column alignment, 38–39
declarations organized into blocks, 40–41
importance of, 35
line breaks for consistency and compactness,
35–37
methods to clean up irregularity, 37–38
order of code, 39–40
personal style vs. consistency, 42
vs. design, 34
Ajax, submitting data to server with, 112
alert() (JavaScript), 112
ambiguous names, 24
ambiguous pronouns, comments with, 60
anonymous functions, 80
arguments
assignment by name, 63
order in conditionals, 70
arrays, JavaScript function to remove value from,
95
assert() method, 154–155
assertEqual() method (Python), 155
assignment, inside if statement, 71
attributes, encoding in names, 16–17
authorization of web page user, PHP for, 132

**B**
Beck, Kent, Smalltalk Best Practice Patterns, 119

```
begin and end, inclusive/exclusive ranges using,
26–27
big picture comments, 55
block scope, 100
blocks of code, declarations organized into, 40–41
Booleans
names for, 27
rewriting expressions, 85
Boost C++ library, 154
bottom-up programming, 114
Brechner, Eric, 96
bucketing events in small time window, 174–178
bugs
comments and, 50
off-by-one, 25
```
```
C
C programming language, variable definitions
location, 101–102
C#, structured idiom for cleanup code, 76
C++
block scope, 100
code for reading file, 112
if statement scope in, 98
inline comment for named function parameter,
64
macros, 90
simplifying expressions, 90
Standard Library, 28
structured idiom for cleanup code, 76
cache, adding, 141
capitalization, names with, 20
Cipher class (Python), 117
class interface, for minute/hour counter, 166–169
class member variables, 97
class member, restricting access to, 98
classes
inter-class complexity from multiple, 179
names of, 8
cleanup code, structured idiom, 76
```
We’d like to hear your suggestions for improving our indexes. Send email to _index@oreilly.com_.

```
185
```

clever code, confusion from, 86
Clip() function, 24
closure in JavaScript, 99
code, viii, 150
(see also test code)
eliminating duplicate, 38
isolating regions of, 129
less vs. more, 3
multiple tasks vs. single, 122–130
qualities of good, 2
redundant, 170
removing unused, 143
test-friendly development, 160
turning thoughts into, 132–138
understandable, 2
writing less, 140–145
codebases
directory for general-purpose code, 114
keeping small, 142
column alignment, 38–39
command-line flag, name for, 14
comments, 3, 46–57, 60–65
ambiguous pronouns in, 60
big picture, 54
code flaw descriptions, 50–51
compactness, 60
constants explained, 51
function behavior description, 61
information-dense words in, 64
input/output examples to illustrate corner
cases, 61–62
insights about code in, 50
intent statement for code, 62–63
lining up, 36–37
minute/hour counter improvements, 167–169
named function parameter, 63–64
names and, 49
preciseness, 60, 61
purpose of, 46
reader’s perspective for, 51
summary, 42, 55
what, why, or how, 56
when not to use, 47–49
writer’s block, 56
complex idea, ability to explain, 132
complexity, 142
complicated logic, breaking down, 86–88
concrete names, vs. abstract, 13–15
conditional expression (?: ), 73–74
conditionals, order of arguments, 70
consistent layout, 34
line breaks for, 35–37
personal style vs., 42
constants, 103
comments to explain, 51

```
constructors, formatting names, 21
continue statement, 75
control flow, 70–81
?: conditional expression, 73–74
early return from function, 75–76
eliminating variables, 96
following flow of execution, 80
goto statement, 76
nesting, 77–79
ConveyorQueue interface, 176
implementing, 178
cookies in JavaScript, 116
copy constructor, default, 13
corner cases, input/output comment examples to
illustrate, 61–62
crutch comments, 49
```
```
D
dashes, names with, 20
database tables, program to join, 134–137
De Morgan’s laws, 85
declarations, organized into blocks, 40–41
defragmenting code, 122
deleting unused code, 143
design, vs. aesthetics, 34
development time, sweet spot for, 162
dictionary in Python, 144
sensitive information in, 117
DISALLOW_COPY_AND_ASSIGN macro, 14
DISALLOW_EVIL_CONSTRUCTOR macro, 13
do-while loops, avoiding, 74–75
DRY (Don’t Repeat Yourself) principle, 89
duplicated code, eliminating, 38
```
```
E
Eclipse, word-completion command, 19
Emacs, word-completion command, 19
end, inclusive/exclusive ranges using, 26–27
error messages
hand-crafted, 155–156
readability, 154–156
exceptions, 80
execution flow, following, 80
expectations of users, matching, 27–28
explaining variables, 84
expressions
breaking down, 84–91
complicated logic in, 86–88
one-line vs. multiple lines, 3
short-circuit logic abuse, 86
simplifying, 90
external components
testing issues, 161
extracting, 110
```
**186** INDEX


```
(see also subproblems code extraction)
values from object, 124–128
```
**F**
false, 27
features, decision not to implement, 140
file contents, reading, 112
Filter() function, 24
findClosestLocation() example, 110–111
first and last, inclusive ranges using, 26
FIXME: marker, 50
flow of execution, following, 80
for loops, 170, 171
removing nesting inside, 78–79
formatting names, meaning from, 20–21
format_pretty() function, 113
Fowler, Martin, Refactoring: Improving the Design
of Existing Code, 119
function pointers, 80
functionality, project-specific, 115
functions
anonymous, 80
comments for behavior description, 61
early return from, 75–76, 78
extracting code into separate, 110–118
names of, 8
wrapper, 116
fundamental theory of readability, 3

**G**

general-purpose code, 112–114
creating, 114
generic names, 10–12
get*() methods, user expectations for, 27
global scope, JavaScript, 100
global variables
avoiding, 97
testability, 161
Google
DISALLOW_EVIL_CONSTRUCTOR macro, 14
formatting conventions for open-source
projects, 20–21
Gosling, James, 104
goto statement, 76

**H**
HACK: marker, 50
helper methods, 37, 130
names in test code, 159
ShiftOldEvents() in minute/hour counter, 173
test code clean-up with, 151
high-level comments, 55
HTML tags, id or class attribute names, 21
HttpDownload object, 128

```
Hungarian notation, 17
```
```
I
if statement
assignment inside, 71
handling separate, 127–128
name of index for, 12
order of arguments, 70
scope in C++, 98
if/else blocks, order of, 72–73
immutable data types, 104
implementing features, decision not to, 140
inclusive ranges, first and last for, 26
inclusive/exclusive ranges, begin and end for, 26–
27
indices, names for, 12
information-dense words, comments with, 64
inline comments, named function parameters in,
64
input values, choosing good for test, 156–158
input/output comment examples, to illustrate
corner cases, 61–62
IntelliJ IDEA, word-completion command, 19
interface
reshaping, 117
simplifying existing, 116
intermediate result variable, eliminating, 95, 101,
105
isolating regions of code, 129
```
```
J
Java
block scope, 100–101
inline comment for named function parameter,
64
structured idiom for cleanup code, 76
JavaScript
alert(), 112
cookies, 116
findClosestLocation() example, 110–111
formatting names, 21
function to remove value from array, 95
global scope, 100
no nested scope, 100–101
or operator, 86
private variables in, 99
jQuery JavaScript library, 133
jQuery library function, formatting names, 21
```
```
L
last, inclusive ranges using, 26
libraries, 116
knowledge of, 133–134, 143–144
regular expressions, 153
```
```
INDEX 187
```

limits, names for, 25
line breaks in code, 35–37
lines of code, minimizing, vs. time requirements,
73
list::size() method, user expectations for, 28
lists in Python, 144
logic
breaking down complicated, 86–88
clear description, 132
loop iterators, 12
loops, removing nesting inside, 78–79

**M**

macros (C++), 90
matching database rows, Python code to find, 135–
137
max, for inclusive limits, 25
memory leaks, 14
memory requirements, 174
mental baggage, 67
messy code, comment for, 50
min, for inclusive limits, 25
minilanguages, implementing custom, 152–153
minute/hour counter, 166–180
class interface, 166–169
comments, 167–169
comparing solutions, 179
conveyor belt design, 171–174
naive solution, 169–171
performance problems, 171
time-bucketed design, 174–178
TrailingBucketCounter implementation, 176–
177

**N**

named function parameter comments, 63–64
names
acronyms or abbreviations in, 19
avoiding misunderstanding, 24–31
Booleans, 27
comments and, 49
concrete vs. abstract, 13–15
encoding attributes, 16–17
evaluating multiple candidates, 29–31
formatting for meaning, 20–21
generic, 10–12
information in, 8, 16–17
length of, 18–20
limits, 25
loop iterator options, 12
measurement units in, 16
MinuteHourCounter class improvements, 167
Python argument assignment by, 63
specificity of words and, 8–10

```
for test functions, 158–159
negative case in if/else, vs. positive, 72–73
nesting, 77–79
accumulating, 77
removing by early return, 78
removing inside loops, 78–79
nondeterministic behavior, 161
```
```
O
off-by-one bug, 25
OpenBSD operating system, Wizard mode, 29
or operator, 86
order of code, 39–40
```
```
P
paragraphs, breaking code into, 41–42
performance, vs. precision, 174
personal style vs. consistency, 42
perspective of others, 169
PHP
reading file contents, 112
user authorization for web page, 132
pitfalls, anticipating with comments, 53–54
plain English
code explanation in, 132
test description in, 152
plaintext, indicator in names, 17
positive case in if/else, vs. negative, 72–73
precision, vs. performance, 174
printf(), 153
private variables, in JavaScript, 99
problems
anticipating with comments, 53–54
in test code, 150
product development, testing as limitation, 162
project-specific functionality, 115
prototype inheritance pattern, evaluating names
for, 29–31
purpose of entity, name choices and, 10–12, 10
Python
argument assignment by name, 63
assert statement, 155
code to find matching database rows, 135–137
dictionary with sensitive user information, 117
lists and sets, 144
no nested scope, 100
or operator, 86
reading file contents, 112
structured idiom for cleanup code, 76
unittest module and test method names, 159
```
```
Q
questions, anticipating with comments, 52
```
**188** INDEX


**R**
ranges
inclusive, first and last for, 26
inclusive/exclusive, begin and end for, 26–27
readability
error messages and, 154–156
fundamental theory of, 3
test code and, 150–153
variables and, 94–106
reading file contents, 112
redundancy check, comment as, 63
redundant code, 170
Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code
(Fowler), 119
regular expressions
libraries, 153
precompiling, 115
removing unused code, 143
requirements, questions and breakdown, 140–141
return value, name for, 10
returning early from function, 75–76
removing nesting by, 78
reverse iterator, 171
Ruby, or operator, 86
--run locally command-line flag, 14–15

**S**

scope
global, in JavaScript, 100
if statement in C++, 98
name length and, 18
of variables, shrinking, 97–102
security bug, names and, 17
sets in Python, 144
ShiftOldEvents() method, 173
short-circuit logic abuse, 86
signal/interrupt handlers, 80
silhouette of code, 36
Smalltalk Best Practice Patterns (Beck), 119
specificity of words, name selection and, 8–10
statements, breaking down, 89
static methods, 98
statistics, incrementing, 128–130
stock purchases, recording, 134–137
store locator for business, 140–141
Stroustrup, Bjarne, 75
subproblems code extraction, 110–118
findClosestLocation() example, 110–111
general-purpose code, 112–114
project-specific functionality, 115
simplifying existing interface, 116
taking things too far, 117
utility code, 111–112
summary comments, 42, 55

```
summary variables, 84–85, 89
“surface-level” improvements, 5
```
```
T
tasks
extracting values from object, 124–128
multiple vs. single, 122–130
size of, 123–124
UpdateCounts() function example, 128–130
temporary variables, 94
ternary operator, 73–74
test code
creating minimal statement, 152
helper method names in, 159
locating problems in, 150
readability, 150–153
Test-Driven Development (TDD), 160
testing, 150–163
CheckScoresBeforeAfter() function for, 153
choosing good input values, 156–158
code development and, 160
going too far, 162
and good design, 161
identifying problems in, 159–160
large inputs for, 157
multiple tests of functionality, 158
names for test functions, 158–159
website changes, 29
text editors, word-completion command, 19
TextMate, word-completion command, 19
threading, 80
time, requirement for understanding code, 3
time-sensitive systems, 176
tmp variable, alternative, 11
TODO: marker, 50
top-down programming, 114
TrailingBucketCounter class, 176–177
true, 27
typo, column alignment to find, 39
```
```
U
underscores, names with, 20
Unix tools, 144
UpdateCounts() function, 128–130
user authorization for web page, PHP for, 132
user information, Python dictionary with sensitive,
117
users, matching expectations, 27–28
utility code, extracting, 111–112
```
```
V
values, extracting from object, 124–128
var keyword (JavaScript), 100
variables
```
```
INDEX 189
```

class member, 97
eliminating, 94–96
eliminating intermediate results, 95, 101, 105
explaining, 84
global, testability, 161
impact on readability, 94–106
measurement units in name, 16
moving definitions down, 101–102
names of, 8
order of definitions, 39–40
private, in JavaScript, 99
shrinking scope, 97–102
summary, 84–85
swapping, name choices when, 11
temporary, 94
write-once, 103–104, 106
Vi, word-completion command, 19
virtual methods, 80

**W**

web pages, PHP for user authorization, 132
web server, tracking bytes transferred (see minute/
hour counter)
websites, experiments to test change, 29
while loops
order of arguments, 70
vs. do-while loops, 75
word-completion command, long names and, 19
wrapper functions, 116
write-once variables, 103–104, 106
writer’s block, comments and, 56

**X**

XXX: marker, 50

**190** INDEX


### A B O U T T H E A U T H O R S

Although raised in the circus, **Dustin Boswell** realized early on that he was better at

computers than at acrobatics. Dustin received his B.S. from Caltech, where he got hooked on

computer science, and then went to UC San Diego for his master’s degree. He worked at Google

for five years, on a variety of projects including web crawling infrastructure. He's built

numerous websites and enjoys working on "big data" and machine learning. Dustin is now an

Internet startup junkie who spends his free time hiking the Santa Monica mountains and being

a new dad.

**Trevor Foucher** has worked on large-scale software development at Microsoft and Google for

over 10 years. He is currently an engineer on search infrastructure at Google. In his spare time,

he attends gaming conventions, reads science fiction, and serves as COO of his wife's fashion

start-up company. Trevor graduated with a BS degree in Electrical Engineering and Computer

Science from UC Berkeley.